In this video we'll learn about C++ expressions and statements.
Let's start with expressions expressions of the most basic building blocks in programming expressions
are defined as follows in the C++ standard a sequence of operators and operands that specifies a computation.
We'll see some examples shortly but for now you can think of an expression as a sequence of operands
and operators that compute a value.
That's a pretty simplistic view but it will serve us well until we learn more advanced C++ features.
Let's see some examples C++ expressions.
Let's start with the literal 34.
That's an expression whose value is simply 3:34 variables such as favorite number in this example are
also expressions since their value is the value of the variable.
We can also have mathematical expressions such as 1.5 plus 2.8 which will add those two numbers and
2 times 5 which will multiply 2 and 5.
There are many many more examples of expressions since there are many operators in C++ and we can combine
them to make any expression we wish.
If we wanted to test to see if a was greater than B where A and B are variables we can use the greater
than sign between the and the B.
This evaluates to a boolean a true false value.
Notice the last example.
This is an assignment expression.
We are assigning be to a.
This is also an expression because the value of this expression is what we just assign.
We'll talk more about this in a few videos when we talk about assignment statements in detail.
Now let's see what makes a statement different from an expression.
A statement is a complete line of code that performs some action.
Statements are usually terminated with a semi-colon.
When you first learn C++ it's a very common error to forget to terminate statements with semi-colons
statements usually contain expressions as you would expect.
C++ has many types of statements.
It has expressions statements the null statement compound statements and more will discuss specific
types of statements in the next several sections of the course.
Let's see some examples see possible statements.
The first statement is a declaration statement which we've already seen in this course when we declared
variables.
In this example we declare x to be of type integer.
The second is a simple assignment statement where we assign the literal expression 12 to favorite number.
The third example is an expression statement.
Note that it's simply an expression with a semi-colon at the end.
It's a pretty useless statement though since we got two numbers but don't do anything with the sum.
The fourth example is.
X equals 2 times 5 is an assignment statement.
First we multiply 2 and 5 and store the product in X..
Notice how expressions are used to make up the statement.
The next example is an if statement if statements give you lots of power to control the flow of your
program.
We'll discuss if statements in detail but you can see that we're comparing a and b and if a is greater
than B then we execute the statement that displays to the console.
So here you can see an example of a statement that contains an other statement within it and is also
made up of expressions.
The final statement is simply a semi-colon.
This is the null statement and performs no actions.
You don't often use the null statement but it can come in handy sometimes.